追寻生命的意义
----------
以作者自己在奥斯维辛集中营的经历，试图鼓励人们找出生命本身的意义。个人觉得本书具有一定的时代性。若是光从文字的角度来看，算不上一本太好的书，稍许带点流水账的意味。

人性的弱点
----------
简述社交活动中容易被人忽视的技巧。我认为卡耐基的一大特点就是在支撑自己论点的时候，使用大量的自己身边的例子。这种做法毁誉参半吧。主要是通过此书来完善自己，提升自己在社交活动中的技巧。

天堂茶话
----------
虽然18年还没过完，不过应该是我今年看到的最好的一本书，这也可能是个人比较推崇老子思想的缘故。之前还是对老子思想有一定的误解，对于《道德经》中箴言的应用环境把握得不是很准确。读完此书真的豁然开朗。本书假想孔子以请教的方式，与老子就多个问题展开讨论。详细阐述道家思想是如何看待统治者，或者说政府，与普通民众的关系的。探讨顺应天道的具体落实方法。最本源的道家思想，加入近现代文明政治的案例分析，使思想更易理解，更容易被人接受。当然也并不完美，有些具体问题并没有给出令人特别满意的答案，算是给读者留下了自己思考的空间吧。

给青年的十二封信
----------
孟实算是我最喜欢的作家了。讲的话浅显易懂。本书以信的形式向青年们谈了些生活的各个方面。我虽然已经过了中学的年纪，读来还是有益的。将《谈美》以第十三封信的形式附上，这书以前我是看过的。写的极好。也是由《谈美》喜欢上孟实的。真正能把问题论述清楚还不画蛇添足的，在我有限的印象中，着实屈指可数。

黑客与画家
----------
不错的一本书。虽然是21世纪初写出来的书，但是现在读起来仍有许多可利用的价值。前半部分解释了大众对黑客的误解，以及黑客某些不为大众所接受的思想。后半部分对比各种编程语言，并试图说出一种好的编程语言应该具备的特质以及如何让这种语言在黑客中流行（非程序员可跳过这一部分）。

如何阅读一本书
----------
原本对这种工具书报的希望不是很大，不过读完之后感觉本书基本达到它想要达到的目的。原来我有不喜爱读前言和目录的坏习惯，读过这本书还是决定改正。它鼓励我们多层次地阅读，并且要追求达到一定的效果。每本书可以多读几遍，读者不要一味贪多。我感觉这个也是很多读书人的毛病。它给出阅读不同种类书籍的方法，虽然有些方法并不那么奏效，不过广泛涉猎总还是有益的。

教你幽默到心田
----------
闲逛到图书馆，就随便找一本书来消磨时间。也是冲着刘墉的名气选的。全书不长，大概一个多小时可以读完。并非以长篇大论的形式展开，而是使用短小的类似笑话集的方式，配以点评多种笑话的行成和运用写成的。幽默还是平常自己得多积累、体会，看这种书也是学到一点是一点，权当消遣罢了。

自私的基因
----------
很早以前就听说过这本书，一直没机会拜读。可能是个人比较喜欢博弈论的缘故，对于基因如何生存下去，个体相互之间如何计算利益得失这种纯理论化的讲解并不那么反感。书中经常能通过简单的计算比较、模拟演化，得出一个种群的稳态进化策略。道理之简单，有时竟会让人在心里默默质疑一遍:
真的是这样吗？不过往往最简单最直接的就是最有效的方式，就是事情的实际情况。生物学作为最前沿的学科，其实我们应该支持科学家们不断提出创造性的合乎情理的理论，并在日后证实或者证伪它们。因为我们真的很需要了解世界、了解生物，从而更好地了解自身。

Caesar-Life of A Colossus
----------
In the very beginning, the book depicted that the ancient Roman was in a
situation where both glories and glooms existed at the same time. Those
serious problems were so difficult to tackle with that several great
politicians introduced policies and conducted reforms but received
little effects. Therefore, series of civil war occurred, and Caesar was
exposed to these chaos and bloodshed in his teens. And Caesar gained
certain reputation during the process. More importantly, Caesar’s
exceptional ability made his final success. He exceled in self publicity
and utilization of resources, especially on how to establish and
maintain various relationships. He captured every opportunity he could
have, and even created opportunities to win glories if necessary.

He tried to prevent the civil war, when he was awarded unprecedented
glories by the Republic and envied by both his former allies and
enemies. But he exerted his energy to win when the civil war went on. He
carried out policy of mercy at most of the time despite his opponents’
behaviors, while knowing the right time to execute the tyranny if
necessary. His final victory should be largely attributed to his
personal military talents and loyal troops. Afterwards, a serious of
acts were done under his command to make order recover and Roman was led
to prosperousness. Nevertheless, such great hero received tragical
ending. He was stabbed in the Congress, and conspirators even includes
his allies in the civil war.

Facing such tragedy, I would like to conclude that the age does not
prepare to admit such hero. Politicians in the Congress could never bear
the fact that decision-making power was possessed by only one person or
just a small group of people. Maybe, basically the fact actually, Caesar
introduced policies that were beneficial to the citizen. In that era,
the thing itself does not matter, but the way to do does.

Additionally, it is unquestionable that Caesar himself worth to be
learnt. Proper utilization of resources, appropriate manners to
different people and precise control of the current complexion
contribute to this charming person. It is highly unlikely that we can
become so honorable as Caesar, but it will definitely make a difference
if we are truly influenced by him even for a little bit.

学习之道
----------
这是在原版书群友的推荐下阅读的一本书。主要是从各角度提供学习理工科知识的方法。记忆比较深刻的有巧妙利用发散思维、间隔法训练等等。对于我而言，最大的帮助是提供了一个高屋建瓴的总结和较为详细的理论依据，同时也让我意识到之前上学时学习方法存在的一些小问题。

魔鬼聊天术
----------
这本书也是在原版书群友的推荐下阅读的，对我有不小的触动。汉语作为一个拥有高语境的语种，很多时候不能只从表面去理解。类似我这种重度直男，即便有些话有很强烈的暗示性，但是可能仍然体会不到说话人背后真正的用意。再加上本人纯种理科男，总是以效果为导向，以解决问题作为谈话的最终目的，致力于提高交流沟通的效率，殊不知这样做的结果基本就是杀死了对话，让交流无以为继。所以我决定慢慢进行改变，在谈话中加入感情、态度和行为，而不是别人问什么回答什么。努力做到理性思维对自己，感性思维对别人。

Emotional intelligence 2.0
----------
Skimming through the book did increase my knowledge about the EQ. Just
like the vast majority of men, I can better perceive and thus manage my
own emotions, but I am less capable of detecting others’ and promoting
the relationships. Fortunately, EQ is not something that cannot be
improved through trainings. Instead, I am confident that I can possess a
higher EQ, as long as I keep practicing and stay around people with high
EQ.

Gilgamesh
----------
Subject to the technology development, the *Gilgamesh* was not fully
documented. It is narrative oriented, despite of the discontinuity of
plots. It has some of the features of earlier works, such as synonymy
emersion. This ensures the effect of information transmission to some
degree, and usually displays the deepening in the extend or different
aspects of a thing. The book describes sexual behaviors with an open
mind, which is a little bit unexpected to me. Most interesting is that a
new discovery has been made in scientific archaeology shortly after I
finish reading the book. Even though the finding is only a small piece
of new plot in the book, it demonstrates how people of that time viewed
“civilization”.

Iliad
----------
The book starts at the ninth year of the Trojan war but does not end at
the fall of Troy as expected. Instead, it ends at the burial of Hector
and shows Achilles’ (and some other Greek heroes’) sympathy for their
enemy. Homer affirms and promotes the value of heroism in battlefield,
as Achilles and Hector are well respected, but questions the legitimate
and the necessity of the war at the same time. He even tries to offer an
alternative way to address conflicts: through law and regulation. This
view is far superior to that of his contemporaries.

Odyssey
----------
The book adopted double the ring structure, starting and ending at
Ithaca where Odysseus’ wife and son suffered the maltreatment from the
suitors. The special relationship between Odysseus and Athena is the
link of the book, which ensures the safe homecoming of Odysseus and his
eventual successful revenge on suitors. Although Odysseus is a strong
and mighty fighter, he is more famous for his wits and tricks, which is
exactly another kind of heroic value that this book wants to promote, in
contrast to Achilles as a pure valiant warrior in the battlefield. One
thing I cannot understand is that Phaeacians stop helping passing
travelers after punished by Poseidon, which seems to contradict the
belief of hospitality. The most convincing explanation I have received
so far is the importance of chain of command (obeying gods is the most
important thing). But I think a better explanation is possible.

Aeneid
----------
The *Aeneid* shows the attempt Vergil made to surpass Homer. The first
half is “*Odyssey* half” with a theme of homecoming, and the second half
is “*Iliad* half” with depiction of Aeneas’ conquest of Italy. What is
ironical here is that the victims of the Trojan war become the invaders
this time. The whole book seems to serve as a propaganda for Rome, but
it does not have to be. It is polysemous, and different people may have
different interpretation.

Inferno
----------
Reading with a little background knowledge about the politics in
Florence at that time helps me understand many plots in the book. The
whole book is based on Dante's imagination, with many of his own
emotions and opinions. Although the book is designed to promote the idea
of Christianity, Dante also brings a different perspective to the book.
Choosing Vergil as his guide sufficiently proves that his effort to
synthesize Christianity with Classical culture. I don't know if I am
limited by the lack of relative knowledge and period feeling, I am not
fascinated by the book too much. The core value is too simple: the
sinners go to hell and receive punishments befit their crimes and the
good go to heaven.
