# Mastermind - How To Think Like Sherlock Holmes

Maria Konnikova

## The Scientific Method of the Mind

The scientific method: understand the problem, observe, hypothesize, test and deduce, and repeat.

Skepticism and inquisitiveness.

Integration with psychology.

## The Brain Attic: What Is It and What's in There?

In the default mode of our memory system, we do not choose what to store. As a result, our minds have been filled with useless information. We remember more when we are interested and motivated.

Do not let the initial thought (or even bias) interfere with the judgement.

If a nonemotional reason  is given for a subject's state, the prime effect is likewise eliminated. For instance, in one of the classic studies of emotion, if you’re given a shot of adrenaline and then you interact with someone who is displaying strong emotion, you are likely to mirror that emotion. However, if you are told the shot you received will have physically arousing effects, the mirroring will be mitigated.

## Stocking the Brain Attic: The Power of Observation

Each observation is taken in context and in tandem with the others -- not just as a stand-alone piece but as something that contributes to an integral whole.

Be selective. Our brains are bombarded by something like eleven million pieces of data. Viewing the situation as just one moment on a longer timeline and being able to identify it as just one point to get past in order to reach a better future point. Defining the end point as discretely as possible. Setting up if/then contingencies. Writings things down.

Be objective. Observation and deduction are two separate distinct steps.

Be inclusive. Never neglect your sense of smell. The potential for neglecting the omitted increases when we move to higher dimensions, and so does the potential for gleaning more about a situation is we engage actively and strive for inclusion. 

Be engaged. 

## Exploring the Brain Attic: The Calue of Creativity and Imagination

A very interesting kind of imagination plays an important role in science (not the kind of the artist). Imagination brings something hypothetical that is actively created in our minds. This is a setup for deduction.

Psychological distance may be one of the single most important steps we can take to improve thinking and decision making: temporal, spatial, social, and hypothetical. 

Find something unrelated that does not take too much or too less effort to work on. That gives our mind a rest, which a process of connecting seemingly unconnected pieces of information can happen. The theoratical basis is that our minds want to finish tasks. They subconsciously remember the tasks they never got to complete. 

Locations also affect thoughts. A change in location cues us to think differently.

## Navigating the Brain Attic: Deduction from the Facts

We tend to deduce as we shouldn't, ahead of the data, and often in spite of the data. When things just makes sense, it is difficult to see them any other way.

## Maintaining the Brain Attic: Education Never Stops

When something is more rewarding than expected, the reward prediction error (RPE) leads to a release of dopamine into the brain. And the more rewarded a habit is, the harder it is to break.

The more you know and the better you are in reality, the more likely you are to overestimate your own ability. Success breeds overconfidence like nothing else. Overconfidence causes blindness, which in turn causes blunders. Overconfident individuals trust too much in their own ability, dismiss too easily the influences that they cannot control. There is nothing quite like victory to cause us to stop questioning and challenging ourselves.

## The Dynamic Attic: Putting It All Together

When observe things, we have to combine with its environment and context.

## We're Only Human

When we really want to believe something, we become far less skeptical and inquisitive, letting evidence pass muster with far less scrutiny than we would ever admit for a phenomenon we did not want to believe.

Being  a hunter does not mean always hunting. It means always being ready to go on alert, when the circumstances warrat it, but not squandering your energy needlessly when they don't.
